We're thrilled tonight to have as our
colloquium speaker, as you know,
research scientist, oncologist, and
Pulitzer Prize winning author, Dr.
Siddhartha Mukherjee.
Dr. Mukherjee holds a BS in biology from
Stanford, a doctor in philosophy from
Oxford, where he was a Rhodes Scholar,
and he went to Harvard Medical School
for his MD.
He is currently an assistant professor
of medicine at Columbia University,
where his laboratory investigates
malignant and pre-malignant blood
diseases. Many of us know Siddhartha as
a writer whose profound stories weave
together human physiology with deep
truths about the human condition.
He was awarded the 2011 Pulitzer Prize
for general non-fiction for his
magnificent book, The Emperor of All
Maladies: A Biography of Cancer.
And he is now
has completed The Gene, which I saw many
of you have already bought and want
signed, which is really absolutely
extraordinary,
both a personal journey and a medical
journey into that genetic field.
The Gene also has won numerous awards,
was on many best seller lists, was a
notable book for the New York Times, and
the Washington Post, and Seattle Times
Best Book of the Year.
I must say this, it was also listed as
one of Bill Gates' five must-reads for
2016.
So, without further ado, let me bring up
Dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee.
Oh, thank you so much. It's a real honor
and a pleasure being here. Um
You know, this is one of these are hard
lectures to give because the audience is
very diverse,
and every time I have to think afresh
about um
how to
put together
my thoughts on on a particular lecture.
I just came back from the
the the biggest cancer meeting that we
have, which was in Chicago this year,
and one of the things that that allowed
me to do is to think about how the
history of cancer is impacting how we
think about cancer today.
So, what I thought I would do is spend
some time
sort of tracing the journey of of
cancer,
but really in the last few minutes talk
about the future,
and talk specifically about uh
how we're stringing together um
plans to treat cancer in the future.
And then
and then I thought I would show a clip.
As many of you know, Ken Burns and I
worked on the documentary of on of
Emperor for PBS, and in fact, Ken and I
are doing The Gene,
which will be done by 2019. We're in the
middle of scripting and filming right
now. But I thought there was a
particular moment from that documentary
which um
sort of brought the the moral
temperature to the right place at the
end of that documentary, in which we go
to a story of a human being who's going
through the process of what I talked
about, this ambition,
this aspiration to
to mount the the next epic battle
against cancer using rational or
precision therapeutics. What does it
feel like to be a human being in that in
that story?
So, so I'll end with that with that
clip.
It's only 3 minutes long, but I think as
I said, really for me humanized the the
entire the entire book and the process
of writing it.
Um
I've called the the the talk A Changing
Landscape of Cancer, but as I said, I'm
going to spend a substantial time
towards the end of the talk talk about
where we
what the landscape where the landscape
has brought us today, and what some of
the thoughts are about about doing
what's happening next. I'll be happy to
answer questions at the end. So,
we uh
just just to give you a kind of a global
summary of
um of of this of this epic narrative.
Obviously, cancer remains one of the
most challenging um scientific
challenges in the history of medicine.
And if you look back, if you step back,
and if I have if I step back from even
even the writing of Emperor of All
Maladies,
it seemed that there were three basic
phases that cancer had gone through, the
history of cancer had gone through, our
understanding.
And I've called them genes,
genomes, cells, cell genes, and genomes.
And we're sort of in the in the fourth
phase, if you imagine this history as
four fundamental phases.
I've called it cancer physiology.
And it's it's seemed to me that our
transition into this fourth phase of of
the history of cancer,
the medical history of cancer, and
perhaps even the social history of
cancer, understanding cancer as a
physiological aberration and what that
means,
has enormous payoffs, but also has
important considerations about what to
do, what what patients feel like, what
it feels like to be caught in the middle
of this understanding.
Um
so,
um where does the story start?
People have written about cancer
since in fact the beginning of
writings in medicine.
This is the Edwin Smith Papyrus
from 2500 BC,
which was subsequently translated, but
case 45 is a particularly moving case,
in which there's a description which
sounds very much like a description of
breast cancer. Of course, the word
cancer doesn't exist.
It comes across comes into human
vocabulary much much later, and even
when it first comes into human
vocabulary, the word karkinos
for crab
is really a kind of lumpy word. It lumps
together tumors of various sorts,
including some benign, malignant. It
really refers to a mass or a lump
looking like a crab buried under the
sand.
That said,
the disease cancer, like many diseases,
existed um
centuries, millennia before our
understanding of the word cancer, even
the word cancer itself. I find it an
uncanny thought
from the standpoint of medical
humanities. I find it an uncanny thought
that you
all of a sudden when you name a disease,
it sort of springs into existence
like like Adam and Eve, but
but of course, the the that entity
existed in human beings for millennia
before.
And I I
the one thought I keep coming back to is
what did they call it then?
How did they imagine it then?
Um
What commonalities did they find? Did
people, you know, did they find a word
for it? Was there a word for that
particular kind of suffering? It's a
thought that comes back to me over and
over again as I think about this in the
future.
Um
So, I talked about the word
cancer,
and and and the physiology of cancer,
the idea of what cancer was
physiologically.
People
spent a lot of time thinking about that
physiology, of the pathophysiology of
cancer. This is
a supposed bust of Galen.
And Galen was among the first to think
about a systematic way of describing why
cancer happened. Galen believed in, as
many of you know, the humoral theory,
that the body was was considered was
composed of four cardinal humors, black
bile, yellow bile,
phlegm, and blood.
And
it was a kind of And every disease could
be explained by some kind of aberration
of these four fluids, a kind of
hydraulic pathology.
One thing went up, the other thing went
down. Pneumonia was phlegm going up and
red blood going down, or some version of
that.
And of course, for cancer, he reserved
black bile. Um
black bile is this fluid that had really
never really been seen, but was somehow
reserved for cancer for one other
disease, and that was depression. In
fact, melancholy literally means black
bile.
And so, this idea that this this the the
twin aspects of of a physiological
or a physical aberration and a psychic
aberration, cancer and depression
somehow entwined together. Um
And of course, one thing that that that
we know from from the past is that every
time there's a there's a there's a
there's a claim of of of understanding
of cancer,
that claim leads to an attempt to that
metaphor of that claim, the the idea
behind it, what it means, leads to an
attempt to cure cancer based on that
idea. Um so, the idea of of black bile
immediately suggested that the that the
way to cure cancer would be to remove
black bile from the body.
Here's a a Sculptetus mastectomy,
which is brutal in and of itself.
But what's interesting about it is that
it was followed by a kind of purging
ritual, in which they would try to
attempt to move the black bile out of
the local site of the body. Um that is
itself interesting, but what's also very
moving to me is this image from the late
1500s of of post-surgical care. Here's a
Here's a woman that after her surgery
has been bound up with
an attempt
to to produce some kind of
a brace or or a palliation to allow her
to live her life after the mastectomy.
Um
The modern understanding of cancer
doesn't come about until much later. And
as I said, every understanding
every metaphor of understanding creates
its own
attempts to find medicine, and that
medicine ultimately reaches a kind of
plateau or ceiling and we have to find a
new way of thinking about cancer. This
is a a process this this this kind of
knowledge in cancer it repeats itself
over and over again. But the idea that
cancer was a disease of malignant cells
um was something that was brought by
brought into being by several people but
but remarkably by uh by Rudolf Virchow.
Um Virchow looked down the microscope
and began to realize that despite
cancers arising from a variety tissues
that there was a commonality between all
of them lung brain cancer uh
cancer of the liver and the stomach in
all cases that there were cells that had
were dividing abnormally. Um and so all
of a sudden these diffuse entities
uh as I said that the the lumping of the
term cancer began to make some kind of
physiological sense as a disease of
cells. Cells were dividing abnormally
dividing where they should not be
dividing. It was a disease of of cell
division and Virchow coined the term
transformation uh
and it was used subsequently after
Virchow as well to describe the process
by which a normal cell would become a
cancer cell.
Now that it's an interesting word
because it implies two things. One is
that Virchow based on his work had
already figured out that cancer cells
had to arise from normal cells.
Now if cancer cells arose from normal
cells then it so factor it follows that
something must have happened to a normal
cell just all of a sudden or maybe not
all of a sudden
make it into an an abnormal cell a cell
that was dividing abnormally invading
other tissues etc. So already in Virchow
the question had been set up what was
that something? What was that something
that had happened to a perfectly normal
cell that all of a sudden made it
impossible for it to obey normal laws of
cellular division and begin to divide
normally. And if you read Virchow you
you begin to understand that these
questions had an elemental quality about
them. Virchow wondered why wounds heal
why if you make a cut in your in in your
in a in your hand that wound heals and
it closes itself but you don't grow a
new hand.
Um
but in but but but but when a cancer
cell divides it it reaches a place and
then continues to divide Virchow thought
it thought and then begins to invade
other places. So so there was a there
was a really
a ruminative process of trying to tease
out what cancer was in terms of cells.
One idea that came out of that was that
if cancer was a lump of cells was a mass
of
growing cells growing abnormally then we
should be able to cut it out and remove
those cells and thereby cure cancer. Um
so this led to um
the the golden age of cancer surgery.
Um here is um
uh uh
uh Halsted William Stewart Halsted um
who really would take that idea to um to
its its its a kind of um manic
perfection. Uh the idea that if if you
removed cancer cells from the body uh
that you would ultimately be able to
effect the kind of cures uh that would
that had been so fleetingly impossible
in in years past. And for Halsted
really that meant um Halsted is a
fascinating character. I've I've written
about him there have been sort of
several important books and apparently
now a new television documentary or or
serial of some sort on Halsted. Uh I
haven't watched it. So um
but Halsted is a fascinating character
because um Halsted was um
among other things uh he he went to
Europe where he witnessed the birth of
surgery. Um he was a brave
experimentalist and he began to use a
chemical that they had that they had
been using in in um in uh in Europe uh
which was a derivative of cocaine to try
to produce anesthesia. And in fact began
to inject himself as an experimental
subject and very soon he was addicted to
cocaine. Um
and so then he was sent he came from a
wealthy family from New York and he was
sent to a sanatorium to detoxify himself
and the chosen drug for uh the
detoxification of a cocaine addiction in
those days was another medicine called
morphine. So um so then he became uh
doubly addicted to cocaine and morphine.
Um and and the legend goes that he would
scrub out of surgery inject himself
privately in his in his rooms. He
wouldn't tell the residents come back in
complete the surgery and then go right
back in and then give himself a second
dose. Obviously a person who had
perfected a a kind of sense of both
restraint um
but also this this this sort of
uh
secret life which wasn't discovered
until even his his residents including
Harvey Cushing didn't know for years
later uh
didn't know year until years later that
that that that the surgeon had scrubbed
out uh injected himself and come back
right to surgery. It's an astonishing
character in in history. But Halsted's
um
powerful idea again based on the
cellular theory of cancer the passes
powerful idea was that if you extirpated
the cells if you threw those if you cut
the cells out of the body and and remove
the mass then you'd actually begin to
cure cancer. Um and then he made a bold
an even bolder hypothesis and that was
that if that was the case then removing
not just the not just the cells
themselves but the tissue around it um
would be would would actually get more
cures. Um
and so he
on one hand was technically perfecting
sur- surgical practice but on the other
hand also began beginning to advance
this uh radical hypothesis um that in
fact if you cut more you would cure
more. And he thought he would use breast
cancer as his as his prime example and
he began to edge along with his many
students began to edge towards the
radical the ultra radical and the super
radical mastectomy cutting away more and
more tissue in the hopes of curing um
curing women of breast cancer. This is
um one of Halsted's own it's an excerpt
from one of Halsted's own papers um
and it says something something very
moving. It says the patient was a young
lady whom I was very loath to disfigure.
But of course these surgeries were
disfiguring um and he ultimately
committed himself to these disfiguring
surgeries.
One of the things that happens during
this time is that
uh the question of how do you know how
do you know when that your more radical
surgery is working? Um
becomes a question that begins to have a
sort of early ring in the 1940s and
1950s. Uh women begin to wonder you know
I'm undergoing this extensive surgery
that has removed not just my breast but
also the pectoralis muscles beneath it.
Maybe you know in some cases the
clavicle bone the parts of the part
parts of the underarm etc. How do I know
that this was the is the is the best way
to go?
But the but the profession of medicine
the way that we collect knowledge in
medicine in particular in that time is
so self-enclosed that it's not really
possible to understand the answer very
quickly. Um in other words the surgeon
prescribes the the operation and and and
and for a for a for a patient it's
becomes virtually impossible to ask the
question because there's no one who is
willing to be part of the the so-called
control arm of of a trial. No one wants
the less radical surgery. Even the word
radical meaning brazen or
uh you know Halsted uses the word
radical to from the Latin word from root
uh as in radish. Um but the word radical
also happens to mean uh
brazen and and and new and and so what
woman faced with the prospect of
relapsing with breast cancer would uh
say you know randomize me or test me on
the non-radical arm uh when the surgeon
himself trained in this culture of
surgery uh and surgical practice is
offering uh radical operation. So this
trial becomes very tough to to run and
it isn't really until the 1980s that the
trial is finally run. And when it is run
it's a it's a real shock to oncologists.
I remember in my in my interviews
talking to people from the 1980s and and
and all of a sudden it was as if the the
the ground under their feet had been
shaken somewhat because the the the
crown jewel of the theory that cutting
more would mean curing more had been
suddenly pulled
the the the rug of that theory had been
pulled out under their feet. Um and but
this was the was the pivotal trial took
about a hundred years to ultimately run
that showed that local therapy uh with
radiation and uh and and a local
mastectomy was just about as effective
as preventing relapse and death from
cancer.
And it's only in retrospect of course we
know why. We know why because for women
with metastatic disease for women for
whom the breast cancer has already
spread outside the breast more radical
local surgery is ineffective because
you're cutting more but you're not
curing more. And and and sadly for women
with local disease
uh more radical surgery is ineffective
because there is no disease that's
outside the local uh disease to begin
with.
But what's interesting to me is not that
conclusion. Of course that's interesting
because that tells you something about
the biology of cancer. What's
interesting to me is the structure of
knowledge that allows a hundred years to
pass between between the between the
first attempts at the surgery and that
um and that conclusion.
So
at the same time um that that that this
was occurring that the that the radical
surgery radical mastectomy was ascending
to its sort of zenith um
another idea of trying to kill cancer
cells was was beginning to take birth.
The second was surgery it was was
radiation. I'm not going to talk about
radiation today here but the third uh of
course was the idea that you could kill
the cells using a chemical poison of
some sort. Um Paul Ehrlich the chemist
had fantasized about this um but it
wasn't until the release of uh mustard
gas at Bari Harbor that uh in fact this
is from that first paper um showing that
you could get um you could get cells
toxified by small doses of mustard gas
uh that would allow the birth of uh
chemotherapy such as nitrogen mustard.
Uh the same sort of poisonous toxic gas
now converted into a uh into a form that
could be given to patients allowing that
gas to kill cells. Um it was not a gas
anymore, it was a liquid form nitrogen
mustard to kill cells um and thereby try
to uh get cures of cancer by by cell
kill.
And that um idea of using
anti-metabolites anti-chemicals to kill
cellular growing cells
regardless of the of why the cells were
growing. No one still knew why cells
were growing abnormally, but that but
the idea of using um using a a poison or
an anti-metabolite was also used by
several people including Sidney Farber,
a pathologist and therefore doctor of
the dead, uh who began to use
antifolates in uh in in uh acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in children.
And
by the 1950s
and 60s this idea had gripped oncology
uh that somehow if you took not just one
chemical poison but two or three or even
four that you would begin to get the you
could you could achieve the kinds of
things that a generation before had
struggled to achieve that you could
somehow uh combine these chemical
poisons again without knowing the the
the the reason that the cells were
dividing abnormally. These were these
were usually compounds that were found
empirically um either because of of
because they were natural chemicals or
because of an enormous discovery program
that the National Cancer Institute had
launched by the 1950s and 60s uh to try
to find such specific cancer chemicals.
And
lo and behold there were seminal
successes. Um so by the 1950s
um Frei and Freireich um
um at the National Cancer Institute had
demonstrated that childhood
lymphoblastic leukemia, a disease that
carried nearly 100% mortality a decade
ago, began to sort of uh
slip down a slope uh of mortality uh
becoming increasingly curable so that by
the by the 1950s and 60s 30 to 40%
patients had longer term remissions. By
the 60s and 70s almost 60 to 70% of
patients with this previously lethal
disease now treated with combination
chemotherapy began to have long-term
remissions and potential cures. So this
was a radical moment in in the history
of cancer. And when you when you talked
to people um
who administered these chemotherapies
extremely toxic drugs uh six seven drugs
often at a time for pediatric ALL the
drug regimen would eventually swell to
about seven to eight drugs given in
combination uh often leading to almost
two years of therapy for children. Um
when you talk to people you get a sense
of the of the infectious enthusiasm that
they had that this was the final key
that these empirically
derived cytotoxic cell killing poisons
given at the right dose would push
people would push patients right to the
edge of life but then push cancer over
the edge and and yank the person back
and thereby getting the cures that had
been so fleetingly impossible uh so
fleetingly rare and impossible in in
earlier decades. Um and similar results
combination chemotherapy combined with
surgery combined with radiation uh were
obtained in a couple of other cancers
including Hodgkin's disease. This is
Henry Kaplan from Stanford and the
National Cancer Institute in the 1960s.
And in in in childhood leukemia as I
said before and in some other cancers
such as breast cancer after surgical and
radiation therapy the addition of
chemotherapy really began to start
getting longer term survival. So there
was a real moment of infection um uh an
enthusiasm and optimism that this would
be the missing key that we had lacked
for so long.
Um
and uh this project was was embraced not
only by scientists not only by
physicians but by people in in but by
people in society who were beginning to
see their loved ones uh suffer from
cancer. This is Mary Lasker whose
husband Albert Lasker would die of um uh
colon cancer and Mary Lasker became one
of the fiercest advocates of of opening
up biomedical research to more funds
opening up the National Cancer Institute
reorganizing it and launching what would
eventually be called the war on cancer.
So this was an advertisement if you woke
up in the
um in uh
uh if you woke up one morning you would
uh
all of a sudden see in the back page of
the New York Times and the um and the
Washington Post um this massive
advertisement saying Mr. Nixon you can
cure cancer from the Citizens Committee
for the Conquest of Cancer. Um uh Mary
Lasker herself was was involved in in
this kind of adverti- advertisement. And
if you look at the fine print somewhere
along it says, you know, we expect this
to be done it's a 10-year project. Um we
expect this to be done in 10 years if we
had just released the the funds.
To me what's interesting about this
poster is the single C cure and single C
cancer. Um
one disease one cure one form of a cure.
Uh perhaps it's combination of four four
or five or seven chemotherapeutic drugs
again discovered empirically. Um
no one who wrote this advertisement
could tell you if they if you asked them
uh what causes cancer um no one could
tell you definitively what the answer
was at that time. There would there
would be a big debate in the field about
what the common cause was of this one C
cancer.
And this of course led to the vast
expansion of the National Cancer
Institute budget um starting from the
1970s going up to the early 2000s
but only a very modest effect on cancer
mortality. Um here are data from up to
the 2000s looking at um
male versus uh female cancer mortality
in the United States. Um the expected
curve uh in in
uh
red of course expected is just a
straight line um and the actual
mortality which there was a there was a
a flattening but it wasn't the 10-year
Mary Lasker uh
expectation that this curve would dip
down and vanish into zero which had been
imagined by those advertisements. Um
Now what's interesting is that if you
looked within the world of cancer you
began to see uh
if you if you decon- convoluted those
those uh plots and looked within the
cancers you began to see actually very
interesting patterns. So obviously it
with lung cancer and bronchus cancer you
see this phenomenal rise and a fall
driving much of this flattening and
that's primarily a prevention uh
prevention driven uh strategy that is
the cessation of smoking so the
anti-smoking. Um but for other cancers
you see some somewhat different
patterns. Stomach cancer um uh i- i- is
very dominant in the early part of the
century and then slowly falls off for
reasons we still really don't
understand. Um there's some strong
hypotheses about why. Um other cancers
like leukemia somewhere here uh slowly
drop off. That's mainly because of
chemotherapy and cure. And then breast
cancer somewhere in the middle where
it's a combination of many things. Um
changes in epidemiology changes
some role of preventive screening some
role of of of of treatment and therapy
um and and ultimately leading to about a
1 to 2% decline in breast cancer
age-adjusted breast cancer mortality for
the last uh 10 or 15 years.
So
the question
as we edge towards the 1980s in the
field was
if those efforts had really come to a
kind of plateau should we go back to the
drawing board and start to reimagine
what cancer was. What is cancer? Um
what is cancer? Where does it begin? And
and what is the commonality? Why is it
that cells in these diffuse parts of the
body um have have started undergoing
this this process of malignant division?
And that brought us right back to
Virchow uh to this idea of
transformation. What had happened to
that normal cell to convert it into an
abnormal cell?
And there were four major ideas about
what had happened. Uh one was heredity.
So this is a Brazilian ophthalmologist
who had observed cancer moving through
multiple generations in the eye. Um so
so he and others had thought that some
hereditary component uh later called
genes had to be involved. Um this is
Percivall Pott
who thought the environment had to have
a role because um he had a Pott had
observed um that chimney sweeps going up
and down chimneys young boys had a high
incidence of scrotal cancer and
something in the in the chimney soot
must be causing this this cancer. Um
Uh for the longest time people knew that
chance was involved um because you could
get cancer sporadically within a family
with a heavy history of cancer you could
get cancer sporadic sporadically even
within that.
And just uh down the road um Peyton Rous
had um argued that viruses were the
cause of cancer. So it was a little bit
like a
like the the blind humans and the
elephant um
in which everyone had a theory but they
were feeling parts of the theory.
Somehow or the other these four pieces
had to be resolved.
And that was ultimately resolved in the
1980s um
by by bench scientists by basic
scientists who made made the observation
now central to to the theory of cancer
um that alterations in growth
controlling genes cause cancer. So all
of a sudden these four pieces began to
make sense. You could alter the growth
controlling genes by right you can
inherit the the genes, the altered
genes. BRCA1 mutation is one example,
Lynch syndrome another example. Those
genes could be mutated by the
environment,
carcinogens. In fact, interestingly,
Pott coined the term carcinogen
way back when, long before it was even
known what it could be. They could be
mutated by chance
and and viruses could either mutate them
or or create circumstances where the
genes would become mutated in cells
by carrying in genetic material or
causing inflammatory stimuli and so
forth. So, all of a sudden these four
theories began to converge on the idea
that genes were centrally involved. And
this cancer all of a sudden made that
transition, that leap from a a disease
of cells to a disease of genes. And
what's important about that was it was
also realized that these very genes,
genes that control growth and metabolism
and are mutated in cancers are have
normal functions. So,
in fact, cancer was a distortion of the
normal of normalcy. Uh the very genes
that cause our embryos to grow uh turned
out to be the genes that cause that when
mutated cause cancers to grow
abnormally. The very genes that allow
our wounds to heal or cells to move um
are abnormally regulated or abnormally
mutated or mutated, sorry, or abnormally
regulated in cancer. So, and and I I I
like this phrase that was picked up from
from an old uh
the the the tale from Beowulf that
cancer was a distorted version of our
normal cells.
So, the question then turned to
if alterations in growth controlling
genes cause cancer, how many are there
and how common are they? Is it one gene?
What is the So, going back to Warburg's
house question, is it one gene per
cancer? Is it three genes per cancer?
What is What is the nature of this
genetic abnormality which causes
uh cancerous change? And it was very
clear that it wasn't one gene. That was
the That was That became clear quickly
because the technology was available to
do that. So, here is a picture from Bert
Vogelstein's early papers, one of Bert
Vogelstein's early papers, showing the
that process, Warburg's house famous
transformation process. Now, walking
through it, and on top you see the
process of transformation and the bottom
you see the genetic correlates of that
process. So, one gene mutates to a
second gene, adds a third gene mutation,
fourth gene, and others, ultimately
leading to the process. This is an old
diagram. Not all Not every piece of this
uh would apply currently um uh right
now. In fact, we don't believe that
there are many genes that are mutated
between the metastasis of a cancer and
the primary cancer. But, that said, this
was a process that was expected to
happen. Many genes were mutated in a
single development of a single cancer.
Um
much modified in later years.
And that led us to um an appreciation
that cancer was not just one it was not
the result of just one genetic
aberration, but many.
And so, now we could ask the question,
enabled by not genetic, but genomic
technology, how many How how these genes
overlap? What was the genetic overlap
between one cancer and the next?
So, so here's my schematic of it and
we're actually now getting pretty close
to current times. So, things are a
little bit more complicated, but but I I
it's it's worthwhile walking through
this because this knowledge will allow
us to start using these, I think, in in
in today's world. So, so so stay with me
for this slide. It's This is just a
depiction of of a is a schematic in
which let's say a woman with breast
cancer walks into a clinic and all her
genetic all her genes are splayed out
from her first to her last on a piece of
paper, schematically, and we can
identify the mutations that she has in
her cancer. And here you have eight
different mutations in her breast
cancer. So, that's your That's the map,
as it were, or fingerprint, her genetic
fingerprint of her cancer.
Here's a second woman who comes into the
clinic, maybe has for all intents and
purposes, Warburg had looked down the
microscope, would have seen the same
cancer, breast cancer in the right
breast. Halsted would have operated on
the same cancer.
Um uh
Farber would have given her the same
chemotherapy for her for that same
breast cancer. But, if you look at the
genetics of her breast cancer, it turns
out that that her the genes that are
mutated in her case have some
similarities, but are different from the
first.
Here's a third woman would have gotten
the same chemo from Farber, would have
been operated the same way by Halsted.
Um you know, would have gone back to the
same place um in medical therapy for
decades, and her cancer looks completely
different. All breast cancers uh
incidentally.
So, in the '90s and in the early 2000s,
we um
began to organize I can say we because
actually
we actually began to sequence this in in
our laboratory in the early 2000s for
leukemias, but um began to organize this
information into into So, so rather than
be nihilistic about it and saying, you
know, if every cancer is its own cancer,
um then how on how on earth can we treat
this disease? In the history of of
medicine,
there is no disease I can think of in
which every instance of a disease is its
own instance of a disease. I mean, even
when even with the phenomenal diversity
of viruses, in cancer you begin to have
an example in which every single
instance of a disease is its own
instance of of a disease. Every single
specimen is its own specimen.
So, rather than be nihilistic about that
idea, the first attempt was to organize
that information. Can we create a Can we
create a map to see what this looks like
and in fact, you can collapse uh
the common dots into big peaks and the
rare dots into small peaks. And this is
what actually look will will looks like.
So, this is colorectal cancer. This map
has been vastly more refined since this
original publication. But, as you can
imagine, this is what a cancer looks
like to a cancer genome biologist.
With big peaks, and people who are in
the field, you know, we could call them
some names, KRAS,
uh APC, whatever, but big peaks of genes
that are frequently mutated in this one
cancer, smaller peaks, and then little
dots. This dot, again to remind
ourselves, belongs to one human being
with one specimen of cancer. It is not
shared by any of the
40, 50, 60, 100, 200 other cases of
cancer of the same type.
But, um
nihilism aside, um
this led to
uh the idea of so-called targeted
therapy, that we could actually use this
genetic information and if we could now
drive chemicals to lodge into the gene
products made by these genes, if these
genes were really driving the malignant
proliferation of cells, we should be
able to shut it off as almost like a
lock and key.
And certainly in some cancers, like
chronic myelogenous leukemia, this was
achieved uh by the uh early 2000s. This
is a molecule that many of you know
called Gleevec, imatinib, um and this is
the gene product of uh in leukemia, a
product called BCR-ABL, um and and and
Gleevec, synthesized entirely
chemically. This is not a molecule found
in nature. Human beings made this
molecule. Um
can lodge into the cleft of of a
cancer-causing gene product and
essentially shut it off. Um I find
personally, I find this technology just
mind-bogglingly beautiful.
Uh
you know, in in the age where people
have talked about how social media is an
interesting technology, it sounds like
child's play compared to making a
molecule from scratch, building it like
you're stitching something together, and
then making it lodge into a
cancer-causing um gene product. Um
anyway,
uh
that uh that that's the That's the
pivotal trial from from that from CML
lives to treat CML. I still treat CML.
And it was a it was for us it was it was
like uh it was as if someone had dropped
a miracle on on our on our laps. This is
the pivotal trial which showed what
happened with
um patients being previously This is
survival curve. So,
every little dot is a patient that's
dying over the course of time. Um and uh
this is what happened when patients were
treated with either old therapies,
interferon or chemo, and this is that
same survival curve when patients were
treated with Gleevec. They basically
their lives became normalized. And it
was it was truly watching I mean, I was
in in I was at least I I I I experienced
one edge of it, and it was truly like
watching a miracle coming uh into play.
Um and and similar results, although not
of that magnitude, were found in other
cancers. This is Barbara Bradfield. Um
I've written about her. Um
uh she was She was the first woman to
receive Herceptin for HER2-positive
breast cancer. Again, a genetically
entity you genetically had to annotate
the cancer to confirm that in fact, that
genetic aberration was present. What
wasn't present in every breast cancer.
That's why that arrow shows only a
little bump. Um but, if you had that
genetic uh aberration, um then
um this is again from that pivotal
trial. This Barbara Bradfield is a dot
in this in one of these trials. Um you
would have um
really spectacular response. So, this is
uh in
in in breast cancer that had
metastasized, if it was HER2-positive,
uh
the use of Herceptin
a dramatic change in 5 years of
disease-free survival from 60-some
percent to 85%. This was a pivotal
victory in in breast cancer and
certainly in cancer therapy. A targeted
drug that if you genetically annotated
the cancer, would have a remarkable
effect.
And then, um the next step in the 2000s
was to use this uh approach, and rather
than treating late, rather than treating
women whose cancer had already
metastasized, we went back to some
extent to Halsted and said, "What if we
treat those patients who just had local
breast cancer but had the potential of
spreading?
Who in the future, 10 years from now,
might have relapsed metastatic breast
cancer? What if we use that same drug on
those patients?" And here is that trial
moving a survival from 86% to 91%.
So, this was I mean most people in
oncology would consider these trials
pivotal because they began to change the
way we think about cancer
because now all of a sudden you could
begin to create a a new formula
which and a hypothesis. So, what could
it be that if we detected the cancer
early enough, understood the potential
of metastatic spread in some people
personalized it using genetic annotation
and delivered targeted therapy, would
you now begin to see the kinds of cures
that have been so hard to get in or or
or remissions or treat long-term
survivals that have been so hard to get
in the previous years?
Um
So
that was where the field sat for a while
and now
that
we're living a time in which we're
trying to flesh out and test that
hypothesis. Um
The the the the writer Lewis Thomas who
I'm a an enormous fan of, a physician
writer,
um
at practice, you know, was at NYU for
years um
wrote about
an astonishing moment in his
lifetime when he began to see the
application of the rational precepts of
medicine
on the therapy of of people. So, rather
than treating
diseases as if they were arbitrary
and and had to be managed
symptomatically Thomas began to see the
application of these so-called rational
precepts
to the treatment of heart disease for
instance, heart failure, or the
treatment of pneumonia. The
understanding leading to the therapy.
And it was it was both a frightening
time but also an exhilarating time. And
that's sort of where we're edging
towards oncology of
I just
it's it's I've likened it to being the
adolescence of a field where we're in
kind of peculiar adolescence where we're
starting to understand or try to
understand physiology and launch this
this grand experiment. And what do I
mean by physiology? And that means that
when we've looked to find gene, you
know, the idea that we would find the
Gleevec for every cancer has turned out
to be not easy and in fact not
successful.
We've tried to look for these
Gleevec-like sort of exquisite molecules
that turn off and
cancer-causing
gene products but we haven't found them
very easily. But rather than doing that,
the question is if you imagine that
these genes don't act in in or genetic
networks don't act by themselves, they
act in networks, they act together much
like normal cells. Much like the
physiology of normal cells, could you
interrupt something specific about
cancer's physiology? For instance, could
you somehow interrupt the physiology of
growth, its metabolism, its capacity to
escape from the immune system, etc.?
And
for a for a wider public, you could you
could make this analogy of of a of a
machine of the cellular cellular machine
rather than attack its individual
components which we were trying so
desperately to do
when we saw when I saw that
transformation with with drugs like
Gleevec, could there be pieces of
physiology? Could there be not just the
cogs but whole little
systems of physiology that were being
attacked in this case
the
the so-called hallmarks of cancer.
And that's we're trying to do that now
by stitching together
various therapies,
immunological therapies
and various other therapies. So to to to
to return to the hypothesis which I
think is is is the is the intriguing
hypothesis, the question that we're
asking ourselves is will this triangle
help us? Will early detection, genetic
annotation, and biological annotation,
and personalized therapy somehow or the
other yield the cures that we haven't
been able to achieve in the past?
So so just to summarize this again,
the question that that that that I'm
intrigued by is is what have we learned
in these last 10 odd years?
It seems that we've learned that
targeting a cancer's unique
vulnerabilities particularly in
combination yields successes for some
cancers. We've also learned that
targeting a cancer's microenvironment
and its physiology, so not just its
cellular physiology but the physiology
around it is possible and effective in
some cancers. And that early therapy
including definitive local therapy,
surgical therapy, is more effective than
late therapy for some cancers.
And again, I just remind myself of
ourselves of that
pivotal Herceptin trial in which we took
patients who were who had who had
metastatic disease versus early disease.
And and this again leads me to wonder
about this grand experiment.
Early detection plus deep
personalization including genetic
annotation of tumor environment plus
targeted therapy in combination against
tumor environment, will this get to get
get us to that place? You might have
noticed I haven't talked about
prevention at all.
The reason I haven't talked about
prevention is that
it's been quite difficult to get
prevention into this funnel as it were.
It's because for some reason or the
other our capacity to eliminate major
carcinogens including smoking have
suffered, although we've identified
those carcinogens have suffered because
of the appropriate deployment. But on
the other hand, for the last 10 or 15
odd years, we haven't really found major
preventable chemical carcinogens. We've
looked, maybe we haven't looked deep
enough, maybe we haven't
looked with the right methods but but
major preventable chemical carcinogens
with large public health impact have
been hard to find in the West. There are
still some in the in the world at large,
viruses certainly qualify. We found some
important ones. But in in in in this
population, in this audience, when
people ask me, "What should I do? What
what what chemical carcinogen can I
remove from my own living my lifestyle,
my environment?" It's been hard for me
aside from smoking. It's been hard for
me to to to to to come up with with
reasonable answers as to what they are.
And that's going to be a major challenge
as we move forward.
But but from the from the standpoint of
treatment,
this this is this is an experiment that
we that we are certainly launching right
now. And and here's a here's the here's
sort of the the full experiment which
is, you know,
could we combine early detection, deep
personalization, and targeted therapy
and then
do maintenance and surveillance,
basically bring patients back into the
same circle
so that they would once their cancer was
in remission or or maybe was been
removed
has comes back.
Uh
in terms of storytelling,
I I maybe I'll finish with this this one
story. This is my friend um uh who is a
young man. This is a picture of him
taken eight years ago.
My friend Will Kirsky who um
has
has a
a tremendously aggressive malignant
melanoma.
Um and
he received
um
long cycle of immunotherapy.
Um was in a very was in a deep remission
for about a year and a half and then
sadly recurred and relapsed and is now
on a second second trial of a second
targeted therapy. He's basically going
through this
through this through this process. Um
one thing that struck me, I don't know
I've written about this, I don't know
how many people had a chance to read it.
One thing that struck me is that when I
saw this picture taken eight years ago,
this is
Will at a at a friend's wedding.
Um you think you can see that culprit
lesion
right there
the the melanoma right there. Um but in
fact, you'd be wrong. The real culprit
lesion is this one.
Uh just underneath his hairline. That
other lesion is still remains and is
completely has not progressed. It
looks to
you know, looks like a malignant lesion
to every dermatologist and yet that one
has not progressed whereas the one under
his ear which which was barely visible
became the aggressive malignant
melanoma. And that is one of the things
that of course is part of detecting
these
cancers early.
We are using beginning to use deep
learning tools
including this one. This was published
recently which which take things that
are to the human eye look just as
malignant as any others but then
reclassify them using algorithms we
don't even understand. We don't
understand because these tools are
black boxes and reclassifies them as
malignant versus benign hoping to pick
up this this melanoma.
Um and one of the major concerns or
talks
is how on earth are we going to then
treat? I mean if this
melanoma is picked up
in in in a in a human being and removed,
do you then give them that same kind of
therapy with Herceptin, some kind of
drug like Herceptin which will extend
their lives and at what cost?
What what is the what is the what is
this what is the cycle then this patient
enters into and how on earth are we
going to afford
these kinds of
cyclical therapies in which patients
cycle between early detection,
personalization, targeted therapy and
then return back to maintenance and
surveillance?
So
um
I wanted to end therefore
by talking taking taking a step back. Um
I've tried not only to capture something
about cancer as a as a medical
experiment as a biological experiment
but also as a cultural experiment.
Cancer has of course invaded our lives,
our vocabularies in a way that was would
have been unprecedented in the in in the
late 1800s. Um
Um the the
the sociologist Erving Goffman
writes about the idea of a total
institution. A total institution is a
place of work where a great number of
similarly situated people together lead
an enclosed formally administered round
of life. Total institutions have their
own vocabularies. They have rituals.
They have cultures.
They have They have rights of leaving
and entering.
There is the the guilt of survivorship
in an institution when others have
departed it. There's a guilt of
departure from the institution. There's
a language that surrounds you in that
institution itself. Um I wonder whether
as we enter this grand experiment
of oncology in cancer therapy in the
mid-2010s where
the surveillance and the possibility of
overdiagnosis and overtreatment and the
idea of previvorship,
the idea that you're a survivor of a
disease that you haven't yet had.
A woman with BRCA1 mutation is a
survivor of breast cancer even though
she hasn't yet had breast cancer.
A man with a
pre-melanotic mole treated as a
pre-melanotic mole is a survivor of
melanoma that he or she has not yet had
but is receiving preventive treatment
for that future melanoma.
Um So I wonder whether we we we run the
risk in this language of creating a
total culture and the total institution
and what that means for the lives of
patients.
Um so on that note
just spanning, you know,
epic narratives become individual
narratives when you change the focus to
individual humans. Um and so what I
thought is I would end with um
a a a piece that a a a
that that comes from the film that Ken
and I made on on Emperor of All
Maladies.
Um
And it was an extraordinary
piece because we were looking while
we're making this film we were looking
to capture try to capture someone who
was in this cycle, in this cycle of
knowledge. And some through channels
someone brought news of an extraordinary
cancer surgeon, breast cancer surgeon
named Lori Wilson who was herself
diagnosed with breast cancer in the
middle of her surgical practice.
You can imagine the
the enveloping levels or the aspiring
levels of irony
and and defeat and also but also for her
enthusiasm and optimism because she had
been very much at the at the front
itself.
Um
kept coming back to to me.
Lori has subsequently became become a
friend but she
really through an act of extraordinary
generosity basically ignoring all the
sorts of
rather draconian regulations that don't
allow us
for for some good reasons but really
don't allow us to tell patient stories
really
allowed us to enter her life because she
thought it would be she would contribute
to
some broader knowledge. So
Lori's alive and well today
in the middle of of several this sort of
cyclical rounds of of of therapy. But I
thought I would end
by
bringing you to day zero of her of her
entry into the total institution of
cancer.
And I'll I'll
thank everyone beforehand and then take
questions after.
So here's a clip from Lori entering
cancer world as she calls it on day day
zero.
At least he tasted it. You're a funny
boy.
Mommy likes cherries.
It's been a month since Lori's diagnosis
and her 20-week regimen of chemotherapy
has begun.
Yum yum yum yum.
I got you.
Yes.
I'm with Lori.
Hey, how you doing? Nice to meet you.
Thank you.
I'll go first. Yeah.
My husband actually is going to shave
his head with me and so we will until my
hair grows back we'll both be bald
together.
He's my rock.
He's been there for everything. He's
looking good. Y'all forget I've been
bald-headed before. 20 years ago. Yeah,
before Lori and I got together in the
first winter when I grew my hair and
then Lori liked my hair and I haven't
shaved it since.
Aw, what a story. So cute.
Next.
Yeah.
That's me.
That's completely
You can take it all off. Okay.
You okay?
It'll be okay.
I don't buy into the why me
because so much of cancer is not
predictable.
It's not set on family history or any
feature and so absolutely could be me.
Hey Nae Nae.
You recognize Mommy?
I have a 19-month-old and I want to see
my son grow up.
See my son get married and
go to grad school and you know
all the the good stuff that uh
we expect for family.
And with
this diagnosis
um
that's more difficult
thing to see.
Thank you.
I'm happy to take any questions.
Sorry.
I said
my name is Lippy Roy. Um
I'm with NYU Department of Population
Health and so prior to my moving to New
York where I now oversee where I was
overseeing addiction efforts at Rikers
Island. I was a doctor to Boston's
homeless population and never in my
career have I diagnosed I personally as
a as a general internist diagnosed more
cancer
than at that time in my career.
We found out later that the leading
cause of death amongst my patients ended
up being drug overdose which overtook
cancer and heart disease but and I know
you touched upon prevention a little bit
but
I was wondering if you could talk a
little bit just about the really the
complex medical and psychosocial aspects
that really go into all of our patients'
lives. Um
you know, our our patients struggle with
trauma and depression and mental illness
and substance use and
all these can act as barriers to getting
the care that they need not just in
terms of prevention but even throughout
the treatment
the proper diagnosis and treatment of of
of our patients. So I just wonder how
you think would be best to really engage
our patients in getting the treatment
that they need and to just how best to
navigate that. Thanks. Oh, it's so much
outside my area of expertise. I I wish I
could tell you um
um what
you know, I know you're I know some of
your work at MGH um
or in Boston. Were you at MGH? Yeah,
yeah, yeah. So
I I know that the the the the areas um
it just lies
the the challenges there as you pointed
out are enormous.
Um Let alone this this
the you know, this kind of
this this scholarship enterprise
grand experiment which will happen on
you know, 35 people in in an incredibly
isolated setting in a laboratory-based
hospital program in
at Memorial Sloan Kettering or Columbia
or some place like that. How this is to
be generalized across multiple
populations I just boggles the the
brain. Um right now
I just don't have an answer. I just
don't know how to navigate the the many
complexities of levels of complexity
right up from the the genetics, the
genomics, the targeted therapy, the
maintenance and the surveillance. How on
earth to get that to scale is a question
that is
entirely
outside the realm of even my
imagination. I just don't know. I don't
know. Thanks for that video. Very
poignant video. Thank you.
Thanks.
Hi. Thank you so much for your talk.
Um
I guess as as a
as an individual who's a lot of my
social groups I'm one of the only
scientists and especially one of the
only geneticists and cancer biologists.
Um, I always get the same question like
so is everything on genes is everything
based on genes and you know, I like to
say yes sometimes and sometimes no.
All right,
such a weird answer.
And I guess my question more than a
picking your brain a little bit is the
idea of trying to get this
genomic point of view because it's not
as easy as just going to the doctor
getting your genome sequence because a
lot of the mutations that happen in
cancer are not going to happen globally
are going to happen in a specific
environment specific tissue. So what are
your thoughts or what is happening in in
a broader impact to
to get to that to that question trying
to prevent something that hasn't
happened yet because you don't know
where it's going to happen. So you're
asking whether
whether we can detect at the genomic
level patients where cancer has not
occurred yet like bracha one. So bracha
one is a good example in that case so a
woman has a bracha one mutation her
cancer has not happened yet.
What what is what is what are we doing
in terms of moving forward for patients
like that? Well in that case many of you
know very well in fact this is one of
the trial sites for that. We're trying
to figure out we're trying to do
aggressive monitoring of those patients.
They have many options.
Um
to to figure out what what and how to be
aggressively monitored. It's a it's it
creates a particular this is I I wanted
to talk again remind people of this the
total institution of cancer.
I I was giving a
earlier I was talking about a woman who
had a bracha one mutation. She came she
she saw me she had two daughters both of
whom were pre-adolescents and only one
of them tested positive for bracha one.
Remember these children have not even
developed breasts let alone had breast
cancer and yet her relationship with
these one of these two children is
fundamentally changed. So on on so so so
my general perspective on all this is it
sounds it it's a wonderful thing if we
could screen and detect early
these
these cancers that would be a wonderful
thing would prevent hopefully save lives
and prevent
more aggressive treatment down the road.
Of course it has social and and human
consequences and not clear it's not
clear to me we've thought through all of
them. It
adds to this idea of cancer as a total
institution in which you're constantly
being monitored for cancers that that
haven't even occurred. You're a constant
pre-vivor.
Now imagine instead of bracha one you
you magnify this across multiple genetic
mutations or multiple genetic
susceptibilities.
Of course some would be very dominant
like bracha one but others you would be
you would be you would enter this kind
of cancer world that people like Lori
Wilson are already part of. So I think
that that there's an enormous potential
there. We just have to be I think it's
worthwhile being careful about
the total institution of constant
surveillance and diagnosis.
Thank you.
Wait. Hi.
My name is Cecilia Acersante. I do
family medicine. Yeah.
I did a few years of basic science
research in thoracic oncology and I
really enjoyed your presentation and
your book. I wanted to know your opinion
on
on the stem cell theory of cancer
development.
So there are many stem cell fields of
cancer just to clarify
there's not one stem cell field of
cancer. One step one field of cancer one
one stem cell cancer interaction or
intersection is do cancers behave like
stem cells
and a subfield of that is are there
cancer stem cells? Is there something
about self-renewal that's recapitulated
in cancers?
There's been a lot of work done on this
with with some similarly positive data.
The second field is the use of cancer is
the is the use of stem cells to treat
cancer. Really is a separate entity
and there you know in in in the cancers
that I treat leukemias and lymphomas
we've had certain successes with with
using blood stem cells but aside from
that that second field therapeutic use
of stem cells in cancer has been much
much more limited. So
I think the the the idea that there's
some fundamental kind of malignant
self-renewal that that stems that cells
pick up which then becomes translated
into the growth of cells is very it's an
attractive idea
has not really translated thus far into
attractive therapeutics. Do we have time
for one more? Sorry yes you were up
there first sorry.
Hi. Can you hear me? Yes. Okay I'm
Alexandra and I wanted to ask you about
the finding a balance between technical
expertise in a field where you need to
have so much technical expertise and
retaining the appreciation that you have
for individual stories and for what it
means to be a human with this disease
and what it means to be a human with any
disease and how this affects
the human condition and also to have
this really immense technical expertise
in this ability to
find radical new ideas um
that have actual like technical
physiological effects in these patients
while not losing sight of who the
patients are.
Yeah it's a beautiful question. You know
I I it's it's obviously that's that's
something that I I think all doctors
struggle with. The the you know nose to
the ground kinds of things that happen
when you
are treating patients. I saw patients
this morning
and it was
I was uptown I saw one patient this
morning and it's interesting in the
afternoon then giving a lecture sort of
a meta lecture on where we're going in
cancer having sort of undergone that
action myself earlier during the day.
It's it's a little bit like taking a
plane ride and all of a sudden you see
the same landscape from the from the
airport and you all of a sudden are
several several miles above looking at
that same place from several miles above
and it can be it can be very
disconcerting. I think that's I think
it's a struggle that all doctors have. I
think it's something that that the
profession makes you think through and
one of the one of the
extraordinary ruminative capacities of
medicine is to do precisely that is to
somehow or the other um
not lose
what it means to be you know while
you're in the in the technical weeds
not lose not lose the sense of what it
means to be a human being. Um
I think that that to me
I I write to think um
and
my writing to think allows me to
actually to have that to to to to to
ascend that change in
in landscape without having very acute
moral vertigo.
Thank you.
So Ed thanks again. It was provocative
and wonderful. Please join us outside we
have refreshments. Those of you who
would like to buy and have a book signed
please line up at Alumni B. Thank you
very much.